---
title: "「Spatial」1 Statistics for Spatial Data"
subtitle: "Statistics for Spatial Data - Introduction"
layout: post
author: "Linsui"
header-style: text
tags:
  - Spatial
  - 笔记
---

> Since there are some problems about mathjax, I also upload the pdf version <a href="https://denglinsui.github.io/reading-note/pdf/Spatial/01.pdf" target="_blank">「Spatial」1 Statistics for Spatial Data</a>.

# Introduction

## Three Main Examples

### Geostatistical Data

*Geostatistics* recognizes spatial variability at both the large scale (Spatial Trend) and the small scale (Spatial Correlation).  The nearby data tend to be similar.

- Trend-Surface method include only large-scale variation, i.e. independent errors.
- Small variation is important, typically exhibiting strong positive correlation between data at nearby spatial locations.

Target:

- Predict the value at a new region from observed samples  

### Lattice Data

A *lattice* of locations evokes an idea of regularly spaced points in $\mathbb{R}^d$, linked to nearest neighbors, second-nearest neighbors. The regular lattice is analogue to a time series observed at equally spaced time points.

Comparison with geostatistical data:

- In contrast to geostatistical problems, data from lattice problems may be exhaustive of the phenomenon.  

### Point Patterns

*Point patterns* arise when the important variable to be analyzed is the location of "events".   

Question:

- Whether the pattern is exhibiting complete spatial randomness, clustering, or regularity.  

The *mark variable* is the covariate associated with each point and the whole process is then called a *marked spatial point process*.  

## Statistics for Spatial Data

Why consider the correlation structure is important? 

### Estimation

Suppose the data $Z(1),\cdots,Z(n)$ are *positively correlated* with a correlation that decreases as the separation between data increases:  
$$
\operatorname{cov}(Z(i), Z(j))=\sigma_{0}^{2} \cdot \rho^{|i-j|}, \quad i, j=1, \ldots, n, 0<\rho<1
$$
The covariance of $\bar{Z}$ is:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\operatorname{var}(\bar{Z})=& n^{-2}\left\{\sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{n} \operatorname{cov}(Z(i), Z(j))\right\} \\
=&\left\{\sigma_{0}^{2} / n\right\}[1+2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}\{1-(1 / n)\}\\
&\left.-2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}^{2}\left(1-\rho^{n-1}\right) / n\right]
\end{aligned}
$$

****

Compared with the variance of $\bar{Z}$ with iid observations, *equivalent number of independent observations* is proposed:
$$
n^{\prime} \equiv n /[1+2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}\{1-(1 / n)\}\left.-2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}^{2}\left(1-\rho^{n-1}\right) / n\right]
$$

### Prediction

The MSE of prediction with positive correlated data is
$$
\begin{aligned}
E(Z(n+1)-\bar{Z})^{2}
=\sigma_{0}^{2}\left\{1+(1 / n)\left[1+2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}\left\{\rho^{n}-(1 / n)\right\}\right.\right. \\
\left.\left.-2\{\rho /(1-\rho)\}^{2}\left(1-\rho^{n-1}\right) / n\right]\right\}
\end{aligned}
$$

### Experimental Design

Suppose that experimental units are laid out in a $t\times b$ array made up of $b$ blocks (columns), each with $t$ units in them.  Any experiment on calender treatments has to take this into account, as well as the possible spatial correlation running the length of the sheet.  

**Goal of Experimental Design**:

- Find the allocation of treatments to units that will give the most precise estimates of (estimable) treatment effects.   

### Linear Models with Spatially Dependent Error  

Suppose $Z(s)$ are generated by the random process
$$
Z(s)=\sum_{l=1}^{q} \beta_{l} x_{l}(s)+\delta(s), \quad s \in D \subset \mathbb{R}^{d}
$$
where $var(\delta)=\Sigma$.

**Goal**:

- Efficient estimation of $\beta$.   
- $\hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}_{\mathrm{gls}}=\left(X^{\prime} \Sigma^{-1} X\right)^{-1} X^{\prime} \Sigma^{-1} \mathbf{Z}$

## Summary

- **Universality**: All data have a more-or-less precise spatial and temporal label associated with them.   
- **Otherness**: Whether the spatial labels are thought to be an important part of the modeling and analysis of the data is a concern that should be addressed problem by problem.  
- **Relativity to Spatial**: Data that are close together in space (and time) are often more alike than those that are far apart.  
- **Generality**: Nonspatial model is a special case of a spatial model.
- **Importance of Explanatory variables**: All explanatory variables should be included in the mean structure first. A missed spatial-relevant variable will contribute to the spatial dependence and cause misspecification. 